

A note from our recipe tester: “You may think those out-of-date spices in your pantry are fine to use, but they won’t pack a flavour punch nearly as much as fresh spices. To get ahead, I like to marinate chicken breasts for up to 48 hours ahead of time in the fridge and if I’m after a more thicker sauce, I’ll simmer the chicken mixture for an extra 10-15 minutes.” - Amira Georgy, Digital Food Director
Is butter chicken really Indian?

Although popular world round, it was developed in Northern India. There are a few stories surrounding its development, but it goes something like this: cooked tandoori chicken would hang above the stove top waiting to be sold. A chef worried that the chicken was drying out so concocted a sauce of butter, tomato and cream to keep it moist.
What should this recipe be served with?

This recipe is an absolute classic, so as mentioned, I’m pretty partial to serving it simply on steamed basmati rice with fluffy naan bread. If you’re entertaining friends or turning it into a family feast, I like to add little extras on the table such as pappadums, mango chutney, raita and a couple of vegetarian sides such as vegetable dhal or paneer curry. Looking for a starter? My friend Amira Georgy recently created this incredible onion bhaji recipe that I’ve been using on repeat.
Can you freeze leftovers?

This recipe is definitely freezer-friendly. It’s best to freeze it before adding the cream, then thaw and reheat, adding the cream before serving. Make sure you store it in an airtight container or a snap-lock bag and it will keep for up to 2 months.
Can I make it in my slow cooker?

You can definitely make this curry in your slow cooker. In fact, cooking it low and slow only serves to help the flavours of the spices penetrate the chicken even more - with the added bonus of not having to stand over the stove. This is one of our favourite recipes for slow cooker butter chicken and (spoiler alert!) it actually uses ghee instead of butter, which is a type of clarified butter commonly used in Indian cooking. We guarantee it will help give your curry even more flavour.
Do I have to use chicken thighs?

Chicken thighs definitely have more flavour than any other part of the bird, so I usually prefer to use thigh fillets in this recipe, but if you’re more of a breast person it’s totally acceptable to substitute. This no-fuss Thermomix version does just that!
Is butter chicken bad for you?

It is certainly one of the more indulgent Indian curries around, but the sauce isn’t made purely from butter. This particular recipe starts with 20g of butter combined with oil, which isn’t an overwhelming amount when divided between 4 bowls. However, thickened cream is also added at the end of the cooking process - you can always opt to add less cream and add vegetables if you're wanting to squeeze in more nutrients.
Is butter chicken the same as chicken tikka masala?

While having similar ingredients, homemade butter chicken is milder and creamier, with tikka masala being heavier on spicing and having a thicker more tomatoey sauce due to the addition of pureed onions. Chicken tikka has smaller pieces than butter chicken (tikka being the Hindi word for lumps or bits). While some believe the provenance of both dishes is in India, there is a strong movement believing that tikka masala was devised in Scotland, making it one of the national dishes of Britain, rather than an Indian food.
Can you use coconut milk?

While the original recipe uses dairy cream, there is a precedent for using coconut milk in Indian curries, as it is often used in Southern Indian dishes, such as Goan fish curry. If you’re lactose intolerant of just prefer the taste, feel free to substitute.
Is there vegetarian substitute for the chicken?

Paneer is an amazing Indian cheese that is sturdy enough to be added to the creamy curry base, in place of boneless skinless chicken thighs. Traditionally made by adding lemon juice to milk and stirring over low to medium heat until the milk coagulates to form cheese, the paneer mixture is drained and weighted down until firm. Paneer is now readily available in supermarkets or your local Indian grocery store. You can chop it into squares and add the curry directly or shallow fry first and then add it. It's absolutely delicious. You can also add cauliflower pieces (rather than chicken pieces) to this wonderful recipe. Serve with homemade naan, if you wish!
How do Indian restaurants cook butter chicken?

The one major difference between the Indian food restaurant and home-cooked versions of butter chicken is the use of a tandoor. A cylindrical clay oven, the tandoor is coal or wood-fired and can reach temperatures of over 400°C. Skewers of boneless chicken are lowered into the oven, immediately charring, yet keeping the meat succulent. The tandoor is also the secret behind those amazing Indian breads. Dough is moulded onto a curved padded cushion that is then slapped against the side of the tandoor where it puffs and cooks in merely minutes, creating that distinctive chewy texture and smoky flavour. Some recipes use tomato paste, but this one uses the smoother tomato puree. 
