

I’ve lost count how many rocky road recipes and twists on rocky road recipes I’ve made… no-bake rocky road cheesecake, fully loaded rocky road slice, rocky road self-saucing pudding, just to name a few! But this clever recipe has to be one of the easiest ever rocky road recipes I’ve tried. You don’t even need a bowl!

I just love the chaotic textures you get with rocky road. You never know whether your next bite will bring crunch, chewiness, crispiness or just a delightful mouthful of chocolate that will simply melt away in your mouth.
What we love about this Easter rocky road recipe

The best thing about this rocky road recipe is how easy it is. Melting the chocolate in its packaging eliminates the need for bowls, mixing and stirring, making it incredibly quick and mess-free. It’s a huge drawcard for anyone wanting to make a delicious treat with minimal effort. Plus, making them in the silicone trays makes removal easy. The added bonus? You only need 5 ingredients to make this dead-easy recipe.

💡 Tip: Foil-wrapped chocolate is best

Use foil-wrapped blocks of chocolate, not paper-wrapped blocks, as the paper won’t withstand the heat and will tear when you try to pipe the chocolate.

No-mix popping candy Easter rocky road
What goes into Easter rocky road: key ingredients

    Coles Easter Milk Chocolate Popping Candy Mini Eggs With Hazelnut Praline: these add a fun textural element that everyone will love. The combination of chocolate, hazelnut praline and popping candy is a unique flavour combo that works well with the remaining ingredients.
    Milk chocolate: the perennial favourite blends cocoa solids, sugar and milk or cream. Its smooth creamy texture and sweet mellow flavour make it perfect for this rocky road recipe.
    Raspberry licorice twists: a chewy sweet indulgence with a distinct tangy raspberry flavour. Vibrant in colour, they look fabulous in this easy treat. 
    Mini rainbow mallows (mini marshmallows): rocky road just isn’t complete without soft pillows of marshmallow and these mini rainbow mallows add colour and a soft chewy texture. 
    Malted Milk Biscuits: crispy and crumbly with a distinctive malty flavour, they add a delightful textural contrast to this rocky road recipe. 

No-mix popping candy Easter rocky road

You can basically throw whatever confectionery you like into this recipe and it will still turn out fantastic! You could also use white chocolate, dark chocolate or Caramilk instead of the milk chocolate, if you like. Pop in your favourite biscuits to replace the Malted Milk Biscuits. 

See my notes below the recipe for tips on perfecting your no-mix rocky road.


Europe General Wesley Clark ordered the use of force against the Russians.[58] Mike Jackson, a British Army general who contacted the Russians during the incident, refused to enforce Clark's orders, famously telling him "I'm not going to start the Third World War for you".[59] Captain James Blunt, the lead officer at the front of the NATO column in the direct armed stand-off against the Russians, received the "Destroy!" orders from Clark over the radio, but he followed Jackson's orders to encircle the airfield instead and later said in an interview that even without Jackson's intervention he would have refused to follow Clark's order.[60]

Shootdown of Sukhoi bomber: 24 November 2015

On 24 November 2015, at the border between Turkey and Syria, the Turkish Air Force shot down a Russian Sukhoi attack aircraft. The Turks claimed that the aircraft violated Turkish airspace, a claim denied by the Russians; the plane was in the region as part of the Russian military intervention in the Syrian civil war, in which Turkey supported opposing forces. The incident was the first destruction of a Russian or Soviet Air Forces warplane by a NATO member state since the attack on the Sui-ho Dam during the Korean War in 1953.[61][62] The incident led to numerous media and individuals commenting that it could have sparked and escalated into a world war.[63][64][65]

Current potential flashpoints

Russian invasion of Ukraine: 24 February 2022 – present

Buildings destroyed by the Russian Bombing of Borodianka, March 2022

On 24 February 2022, Russia's president Vladimir Putin ordered a full-scale invasion of Ukraine, marking a major escalation of the Russo-Ukrainian War, which began in 2014. The Russian invasion started the largest war in Europe since World War II.[66] Various experts, analysts, and others have described the invasion as heightening the risk of a third world war,[67][68][69][70] while others have suggested the contrary.[71][72][73]

Because of the invasion, at least fifty countries have provided some kind of military aid to Ukraine, including all member states of NATO.[74][75] The Russian government has threatened retaliation against countries supplying military aid to Ukraine, and said it meant NATO was waging a "proxy war" against Russia.[76] Senior Russian politicians—including president Putin, foreign minister Sergey Lavrov and United Russia party leader Dmitry Medvedev—have made statements widely seen as nuclear blackmail. They have implied that Russia may use nuclear weapons if certain "red lines" are crossed, such as helping Ukraine to strike back at mainland Russia.[77][78][79] Officials from the United States and NATO, including US president Joe Biden and NATO secretary general Jens Stoltenberg, have stressed the need to prevent the conflict escalating into a third world war, while also affirming that NATO members will defend each other.[80][81][82][83] The US warned Russia's government that the country would suffer "catastrophic" consequences if it used nuclear weapons against Ukraine.[84][85] Former CIA Director, David Petraeus, said NATO would likely respond by destroying all Russian forces in Ukraine.[86] Several incidents have risked a direct conflict between Russia and NATO, such as Russian breaches of NATO airspace and a missile explosion in Poland.[87][88][89] In early 2023, Putin suspended Russia's participation in New START, the last remaining nuclear treaty between Russia and the US,[90] and announced plans to install Russian tactical nuclear weapons in Belarus.[91]

Russian threats have been described as a way to intimidate Western countries, to deter them from helping Ukraine.[92] Fearing escalation, NATO countries held back from sending advanced weapons to Ukraine, and forbade Ukraine to fire NATO weapons into Russia.[93] Since July 2024, they have allowed Ukraine to use NATO weapons to strike military targets in Russia, but only near the border in self-defense.[94] Russia's government has not followed through on its threats against NATO and has not used nuclear weapons, despite most of its "red lines" being crossed.[95]

Iran and North Korea have provided weapons and ammunition to Russia during the invasion, including ballistic missiles.[96] In 2024, Russia and North Korea signed a defense pact, and that November, Russia further escalated the conflict by deploying 10,000 North Korean troops on its border to fight Ukraine.[97] In November 2024, Putin said that the war "has acquired elements of a global character", adding that Russia was entitled to strike military facilities of those countries that allow their weapons to be used against mainland Russia.[98]

In February 2025, U.S. President Donald Trump, his Vice President JD Vance, and Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy met to discuss signing an agreement for U.S. access to Ukrainian oil, gas, and rare earths. During the meeting, an argument erupted, with President Trump at one point chiding Zelenskyy for not being grateful enough for U.S. military and political support for Ukraine during the war, telling him he was "gambling with World War Three."[99] The agreements were not signed, and Trump later said that Zelenskyy "is not ready for peace if America is involved because he feels our involvement gives him a big advantage in negotiations."[100]Currently the two forces, Russia and Ukraine, are considering a 30-day ceasefire.

Extended usage of the term

Cold War

Large nuclear weapons stockpile with global range (dark blue), smaller stockpile with global range (medium blue), smaller stockpile with regional range (light blue)

As Soviet-American relations grew tense in the post-World War II period, the fear that the tension could escalate into World War III was ever-present. A Gallup poll in December 1950 found that more than half of Americans considered World War III to have already started.[101]

In 2004, commentator Norman Podhoretz proposed that the Cold War, lasting from the surrender of the Axis powers until the fall of the Berlin Wall, might rightly be called World War III. By Podhoretz's reckoning, "World War IV" would be the global campaign against Islamofascism.[102][103]

Still, the majority of historians would seem to hold that World War III would necessarily have to be a worldwide "war in which large forces from many countries fought"[104] and a war that "involves most of the principal nations of the world".[105] The Cold War received its name from the lack of action taken from both sides. The lack of action was out of fear that a nuclear war would possibly destroy humanity.[106] In his book Secret Weapons of the Cold War, Bill Yenne concludes that the military Superpower standoff from the 1940s through to 1991, was not World War III.[107]

War on terror

September 11 attacks

The "war on terror" that began with the September 11 attacks has been claimed by some to be World War III[108] or sometimes World War IV[102][109] (assuming the Cold War was World War III). Others have disparaged such claims as "distorting American history". While there is general agreement amongst historians regarding the definitions and extent of the first two world wars, namely due to the unmistakable global scale of aggression and self-destruction of these two wars, a few have claimed that a "World War" might now no longer require such worldwide and large-scale aggression and carnage. Still, such claims of a new "lower threshold of aggression", that might now be sufficient to qualify a war as a "World War" have not gained such widespread acceptance and support as the definitions of the first two world wars have received amongst historians.[110]

War on the Islamic State

On 1 February 2015, Iraqi Foreign Minister Ibrahim al-Jaafari declared that the war against the Islamic State was effectively "World War III", due to the Islamic State's aims for a worldwide caliphate, and its success in spreading the conflict to multiple countries outside of the Levant region.[111] In response to the November 2015 Paris attacks, King of Jordan Abdullah II stated "We are facing a Third World War [within Islam]".[112]

In his State of the Union Address on 12 January 2016, US President Barack Obama warned that news reports granting ISIL the supposed ability to foment a third World War might be excessive and irresponsible, stating that "as we focus on destroying ISIL, over-the-top claims that this is World War III just play into their hands. Masses of fighters on the back of pickup trucks and twisted souls plotting in apartments or garages pose an enormous danger to civilians and must be stopped. But they do not threaten our national existence."[113]

Multiple small wars as a "third war"

In multiple recorded interviews under somewhat casual circumstances, comparing the conflagrations of World War I and II to the ongoing lower-intensity wars of the 21st century, Pope Francis has said, "The world is at war because it has lost the peace", and "perhaps one can speak of a third war, one fought piecemeal".[114][115]

Hypothetical scenarios

In 1949, after the unleashing of nuclear weaponry at the end of World War II, physicist Albert Einstein suggested that any outcome of a possible World War III would be so catastrophic upon human civilization so as to revert mankind to the Stone Age. When asked by journalist Alfred Werner what types of weapons Einstein believed World War III might be fought with, Einstein warned, "I know not with what weapons World War III will be fought, but World War IV will be fought with sticks and stones".[116][117]

As for the extermination of the human race as a consequence of atomic war, Leslie A. White challenged Einstein, "this too may be admitted as possibility, and all we can say is that if it is to come, it will come. Extravagant expressions of horror will not alter the course of events."[118] Crane Brinton also doubted the psychological pacification of Einstein: "Teachers, preachers, educators, even politicians are telling the growing generation that there must be no war and, therefore, there will be no war. I have doubts as to whether this is wise teaching…" In spite of the atomic bomb, there will be another general war and humanity will survive it, according to Brinton.[119] James Burnham of the Office of Strategic Services (the precursor to the CIA), also believed in survival: The uniqueness of the atomic weapons is commonly found in that they can totally annihilate human life, including through climatic and geological chain reaction, but such is not the case. The great principles of military strategy stand unaltered. An atomic war will look different from older wars but it will be decided by the same combination of resources, morale and strategy.[120]

A 1998 New England Journal of Medicine overview found that "Although many people believe that the threat of a nuclear attack largely disappeared with the end of the Cold War, there is considerable evidence to the contrary".[121] In particular, the United States–Russia mutual detargeting agreement in 1994 was largely symbolic and did not change the amount of time required to launch an attack. The most likely "accidental-attack" scenario was believed to be a retaliatory launch due to a false warning, similar to the 1983 incident.[121] Historically, World War I happened through an escalating crisis; World War II happened through deliberate action. Hypothesized flashpoints in the 2010s and the 2020s include the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Chinese expansion into adjacent islands and seas,[1] Sino-Indian border dispute, Chinese threats of military operation against Taiwan, Indo-Pakistani wars border conflicts, and foreign involvement in the Syrian civil war. Other hypothesized risks are that a war involving or between Saudi Arabia and Iran, Israel and Iran, United States and Iran, India and Pakistan, Ukraine and Russia, Poland and Belarus, South Korea and North Korea, or Taiwan and China could escalate via alliances or intervention into a war between "great powers" such as the United States, United Kingdom, France, Germany, Russia, China, India, Japan or an all out war between military alliances NATO and CSTO, or even the possibility of a "rogue commander" under any nuclear power might launch an unauthorized strike that escalates into a full-blown war.[122]

According to a peer-reviewed study published in the journal Nature Food in August 2022, a full-scale nuclear war between the United States and Russia, releasing over 150 Tg of stratospheric soot, could indirectly kill more than five billion people by starvation during a nuclear winter. More than two billion people could die of starvation from a smaller-scale (5–47 Tg) nuclear war between India and Pakistan.[123][124] In the event of a nuclear war between Russia and the United States, 99% of the population in the belligerent countries, as well as Europe and China, would die.[125]

Some scenarios involve risks due to upcoming changes from the known status quo. In the 1980s the Strategic Defense Initiative made an effort at nullifying the USSR's nuclear arsenal; some analysts believe the initiative was "destabilizing".[126][127] In his book Destined for War, Graham Allison views the global rivalry between the established power, the US, and the rising power, China, as an example of the Thucydides Trap. Allison states that historically, "12 of 16 past cases where a rising power has confronted a ruling power" have led to fighting.[128] In 2020 and 2023, the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists advanced its Doomsday Clock, citing among other factors a predicted destabilizing effect from upcoming hypersonic weapons.[129]

Emerging technologies, such as artificial intelligence, could hypothetically generate risk in the decades ahead. A 2018 RAND Corporation report has argued that AI and associated information technology "will have a large effect on nuclear-security issues in the next quarter century". A hypothetical future AI could provide a destabilizing ability to track "second-launch" launchers. Incorporating AI into decision support systems used to decide whether to launch, could also generate new risks, including the risk of an adversarial exploitation of such an AI's algorithms by a third party to trigger a launch recommendation.[130][131] A perception that some sort of emerging technology would lead to "world domination" might also be destabilizing, for example by leading to fear of a pre-emptive strike.[132]

Cyberwarfare is the exploitation of technology by a nation-state or international organization to attack and destroy the opposing nation's information networks and computers. The damage can be caused by computer viruses or denial-of-service attacks (DoS). Cyberattacks are becoming increasingly common, threatening cybersecurity and making it a global priority.[133][134] There has been a proliferation of state-sponsored attacks. The trends of these attacks suggest the potential of a cyber World War III.[134] The world's leading militaries are developing cyber strategies, including ways to alter the enemy's command and control systems, early warning systems, logistics, and transportation.[134] The 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine has sparked concerns about a large-scale cyberattack, with Russia having previously launched cyberattacks to compromise organizations across Ukraine. Nearly 40 discrete attacks were launched by Russia which permanently destroyed files in hundreds of systems across dozens of organizations, with 40% aimed at critical infrastructure sectors in Ukraine.[135] Russia's use of cyberwarfare has turned the war into a large-scale "hybrid" war in Ukraine.[135]

See also

    Anti-nuclear movement
    Artificial intelligence arms race
    Artificial Intelligence Cold War
    Global catastrophe scenarios
    Nuclear arms race
    Nuclear holocaust
    Nuclear terrorism
    Second Cold War
    World War III in popular culture
    War

References